Type casting (#19334)
dotnet/docs: docs/csharp/programming-guide/types/casting-and-type-conversions.md

  - "converting types [C#]"
ms.assetid: 568df58a-d292-4b55-93ba-601578722878
---

# Casting and type conversions (C# Programming Guide)

Because C# is statically-typed at compile time, after a variable is declared, it cannot be declared again or assigned a value of another type unless that type is implicitly convertible to the variable's type. For example, the `string` cannot be implicitly converted to `int`. Therefore, after you declare `i` as an `int`, you cannot assign the string "Hello" to it, as the following code shows:

```csharp
int i;

// error CS0029: Cannot implicitly convert type 'string' to 'int'
i = "Hello";
```

However, you might sometimes need to copy a value into a variable or method parameter of another type. For example, you might have an integer variable that you need to pass to a method whose parameter is typed as `double`. Or you might need to assign a class variable to a variable of an interface type. These kinds of operations are called *type conversions*. In C#, you can perform the following kinds of conversions:

> - **Implicit conversions**: No special syntax is required because the conversion is type safe and no data will be lost. Examples include conversions from smaller to larger integral types, and conversions from derived classes to base classes.

Reviewer: No related to your PR, but while this is getting updated, I'm concerned about the "type-safe" phrase:

```suggestion
- **Implicit conversions**: No special syntax is required because the conversion always succeeds and no data will be lost. Examples include conversions from smaller to larger integral types, and conversions from derived classes to base classes.
```

[!code-csharp[csProgGuideTypes#34](~/samples/snippets/csharp/VS_Snippets_VBCSharp/CsProgGuideTypes/CS/Class1.cs#34)]

For a complete list of all implicit numeric conversions, see the [Implicit numeric conversions](../../language-reference/builtin-types/numeric-conversions.md#implicit-numeric-conversions) section of the [Built-in numeric conversions](../../language-reference/builtin-types/numeric-conversions.md) article.

For reference types, an implicit conversion always exists from a class to any one of its direct or indirect base classes or interfaces. No special syntax is necessary because a derived class always contains all the members of a base class.

```csharp
Derived d = new Derived();

// Always OK.
Base b = d;
```

## Explicit conversions

> However, if a conversion cannot be made without a risk of losing information, the compiler requires that you perform an explicit conversion, which is called a *cast*. A cast is a way of explicitly informing the compiler that you intend to make the conversion and that you are aware that data loss might occur. To perform a cast, specify the type that you are casting to in parentheses in front of the value or variable to be converted. The following program casts a [double](../../language-reference/builtin-types/floating-point-numeric-types.md) to an [int](../../language-reference/builtin-types/integral-numeric-types.md). The program will not compile without the cast.

Reviewer: Here, we should highlight that explicit casts might fail:

```suggestion
However, if a conversion cannot be made without a risk of losing information, the compiler requires that you perform an explicit conversion, which is called a *cast*. A cast is a way of explicitly informing the compiler that you intend to make the conversion and that you are aware that data loss might occur, or the cast may fail at runtime. To perform a cast, specify the type that you are casting to in parentheses in front of the value or variable to be converted. The following program casts a [double](../../language-reference/builtin-types/floating-point-numeric-types.md) to an [int](../../language-reference/builtin-types/integral-numeric-types.md). The program will not compile without the cast.
```
